dobbiamo difendere, quello in cui noi come sindacato possiamo fare molto, quello in cui
possiamo agire molto e anche questo, da questa prospettiva di pace. Io penso che come soggetto
che parla, incide e pesa sulla scena internazionale il contributo dell'Europa che vogliamo può
anche essere questo e questo nella chiesa internazionale aperta è moltissimo e l'orizzonte
io penso sia questo.
Bene, io ringrazio i nostri tre interlocutori per i loro interventi densi, impegnativi,
belli per questa discussione. Noi ci rivediamo alle 14.30 per facilitare le vostre esigenze
materiali c'è un buffet al piano di sotto al quale si può accedere.
Allora ricominciamo.
Dopo i contributi di questa mattina molto interessanti per il loro alto profilo, ora
i lavori del pomeriggio continuano entrando con uno sguardo più specifico nel settore
dei saperi e delle conoscenze sulle tracce dei percorsi di tre occasioni. A Bologna
nel 1998 è stata firmata una dichiarazione da parte dei ministri dell'istruzione di
quattro paesi europei, Italia, Gran Bretagna, Francia e Germania. Questa dichiarazione in
seguito poi sottoscritta da altri quaranta paesi dell'Unione Europea aveva lo scopo
di unificare, ha lo scopo di unificare i sistemi universitari, finalizzata a definire un'area
europea dell'istruzione superiore. Il secondo percorso di cui seguiamo le tracce
con le relazioni del pomeriggio è quello della Carta di Lisbona. Nel 2000, come tutti
sapete, i governi membri dell'Unione Europea hanno sottoscritto questa carta per finalizzare
la maggiore competitività dell'Unione Europea a un percorso fatto di miglioramento della
società della conoscenza. Infine, il terzo percorso, che è quello di Copenhagen, in
cui il Consiglio dei Ministri dell'Unione Europea ha sottoscritto una dichiarazione
sull'istruzione e formazione professionale, ha finalizzato a raggiungere l'unificazione
dei titoli di qualifica dell'istruzione e della formazione professionale. Oggi abbiamo
le persone che voi vedete nelle relazioni pomeridiane e avremmo dovuto cominciare con
Martin Romer, che è il segretario dell'EQC, se l'ho pronunciato bene, EQC, che è il
Comitato dei Sindacati della Scuola dei Paesi membri e fa parte anche dell'Internazionale
dell'Educazione. Però il professore Paul Benet, che è coordinatore dell'EQC, ha un
uomo che parte alle quattro e mezza, anzi un treno, e quindi cediamo a lui la parola
per primo e in seguito parlerà il segretario dell'EQC, che è Martin Romer, alla mia destra.
Ora do la parola a Paul Benet, se non ho sbagliato, no, ho fatto il contrario, do la parola a
Paul Benet per la sua relazione.
Due scopi, prima di tutto per non essere in grado di parlare italiano, vorrei scopiare per
non essere in grado di parlare italiano, che significa che dovrete ascoltare la mia
presentazione, purtroppo, in inglese, con un'interpretazione. Ho dato una copia del mio
documento all'interpretero, quindi penso che saranno in grado di darvi una versione
abbastanza accurata di cosa vorrei dirvi quest'oggi. L'altra scopia,
che ho sentito molte volte che bisogna fare nel venire dall'Unione Kingdom a un evento
in un altro paese europeo, e questo è, una volta di nuovo, dobbiamo sbagliare per la nostra
attitudine dei governi, le attitudini dei governi dell'Unione Europea. La riferizione
è stata fatta quest'oggi per la sua attitudine a Mr. Bush e la situazione in Iraq, che è
anche qualcosa che mi dispiace profondamente, e la mia Unione mi dispiace profondamente, ma
sicuramente, come vedete dalla mia presentazione, ci sono problemi riguardo i problemi continui
con l'Unione Kingdom e il progetto europeo, che, penso, vengono al centro di alcune delle
cose che avete parlato quest'oggi. Sicuramente, ho guardato con estremità l'envio alla vostra
discussione quest'oggi, perché so quante difficoltà sarebbe per una Unione Britannica
e di avere una discussione più profonda e più profonda sui problemi riguardo al processo
di gestire la Constituzione europea, come avete fatto quest'oggi. Quindi, guardo su questo
con un'enorme apprezzamento, e sono molto felice di essere presente per vedere alcuni
di questi problemi. Ora, andiamo al mio noto preparato, e, scusate-me, lo vorrò leggere
e i interpretatori lo tradurranno. Grazie molto per invitarmi a parlare alla vostra
discussione oggi. Sono un ufficiale nazionale di NACVI, l'Università e il Collegio Dettorale
dell'Unione Kingdom. Nel livello europeo, sono il chair del Comitato di Estandere l'Educazione
e del Piacere dell'Europa della regione europea del Piacere dell'Unione Globale e dell'Educazione
Internazionale, e non, come sembra, il vostro programma da E.T.U.C.E. Nel livello internazionale,
ero un membro dell'E.I. Global Task Force on Higher Education, che ha rapportato al World
Congress in Porto Alegre, in giulio 2004. Mi raccomando questa opportunità di informare
voi di sviluppamenti in l'educazione alta, a livello europeo e internazionale, che hanno
avuto i colleghi di conoscenza in le Unioni Dettorale affiliate all'E.I. in recenti anni.
Il lavoro europeo e internazionale dell'E.I. in l'educazione alta e la ricerca interloca
e sono questi i problemi interloccati e le prospettive delle Unioni Dettorale sulle quali
voglio parlare con voi oggi. Spero che la discussione vi stimola le vostre discussioni, ma
anche che vi accorgi di partecipare nelle nostre discussioni al Comitato per l'Educazione
e la ricerca dell'E.I. a livello europeo. Questo comitato rappresenta le Unioni
Dettorale e la ricerca interloccate all'E.I. e ha iniziato l'E.I. a parlare autoritativamente
per i lavoratori della nostra sectora durante il processo di Bologna e i ministri e i rectori
delle Università non hanno sempre voluto ascoltare o entrare in un dialogo con noi. E questo
è un problema che avrò a ritornare in questo papo. Per prima cosa, vi schizzo le origini e
il background del processo di Bologna e dove è ora. E poi, potrebbe essere utile se
voglio dire un po' dei temi che il debattimento di Bologna ha mostrato nel Kingdome Unito.
Poi, vorrei parlare dei problemi currenti al livello europeo e, finalmente,
parlare della relazione tra Bologna e i sviluppamenti in l'area globale.
Il processo di Bologna inizia ad accompagnare la maggior parte dei sistemi per l'educazione
alta dell'Europa. Inizia con la Declarazione de Sorbonne, che si ha scritto solo per l'Italia,
e poi, in 1998, si è uscita con la Declarazione de Sorbonne, che si ha scritto per il 29 governamenti.
Il numero di signatari continua a crescere, con 40 paesi a partire dalla conferenza
di Berlina l'anno scorso, e, da allora, con la Mordova, che ha annunciato la sua intenzione
di iscriverci in giugno, e l'Ucraina, in seguito, l'ultimo mese. Questa crescita
simbolizza l'importanza del processo come un processo genuinamente pan-europeano.
La Bologna è stata sviluppata e elaborata da 1999 con further conferenze interministeriali
in Praga nel 2001, e in Berlina nel settembre 2003. Le preparazioni sono ora all'interno
della prossima conferenza in Bergen, in Norvegi, nel maio 2005. Il processo è essenzialmente
interministeriali e, da inizio, è andato fuori dalla Unione Europea e le sue strutture
e è andato avanti molto più velocemente che i processi dell'Europa hanno inizialmente
potuto fare, altrimenti l'Europa è diventata un importante giocatore e forza di guida
per questo processo. Dunque, il processo è costruito sui trattamenti intergovernmentali
e non sui trattamenti statuitivi, come è stato il caso nel sistema EU.
Quali sono gli essenziali del processo? L'obiettivo è di creare un'area europeana
per l'educazione alta dell'Europa nel 2010, per che i sistemi per l'educazione alta dell'Europa
avessero convergito verso un livello sufficiente di comunità per raggiungere la mobilità interna
e la mutuale riconoscenza, che sono stati obiettivi a lungo termine per l'Europa
dentro le loro bordi e per presentare una faccia coerente per l'educazione alta dell'Europa
all'interno del resto del mondo in modo da essere in grado di essere un giocatore effettivo
nel mercato globale rapidamente sviluppato. La velocità con la quale il progresso è stato fatto
verso questi obiettivi ambiziosi è meraviglioso, in particolare rispetto al progresso veloce
che l'Europa ha fatto verso gli obiettivi simili ma più limitati negli ultimi 20 anni.
Il corno di questo processo è la convergenza, attraverso il sviluppo di un patto comune dei corsi di degree
basati su tre cicli limitati di tempo, definiti dal processo Bologna, i bachelors, i maestri e i degree drattuali.
Il patto sembra superficially come il modello dell'Europa, ma in pratica le soluzioni adottate
all'Europa possono essere più vicini al modello dell'Europa. Il movimento verso questo patto
è stato pacciato, con alcuni paesi imposando i cicli di tre anni, due anni e cinque anni
sopra i suoi existingi patti. Noto che in Italia il debattimento sul modello dei bachelors e dei maestri
è recentemente riempito, solo tre anni dopo che è stato adottato.
La confidenza nel processo e il mantenimento dei standard comuni saranno underpinati
per le mesure di assurdo di qualità in cui il netto europeo per assurdo di qualità ha un ruolo importante
e il sviluppo dei diploma rendendo il contenuto dei corsi più espliciti e più facilmente comparabili.
Ora vorrei dire un po' dei trend che informano la discussione relativamente limitata
su Bologna nel mio paese, l'Europa. A questo punto il governo dell'Europa è stato
particolarmente complesso per Bologna, credendo evidentemente che i bachelors e i maestri
si accorgono così vicino alla pratica dell'Europa che nessun cambiamento radicale è necessario,
anche se questa complessità è lentamente erogata. Il governo dell'Europa ha la visione
dell'UK come una bridge tra l'Europa e l'USA, ma in pratica la sua pensione si riempie
verso i modelli dell'U.S. in molti rispetto. Questa è una tendenza che è possibile
di accelerare con l'enlargimento dell'Europa, che il governo dell'U.K. vede come un'incorruzione
a una diffusione e un sforzo di un motivo comune dell'Europa. Questo è arrivato al momento
in cui la prossima Constituzione dell'Europa è sotto discussione e in cui molte Unioni,
certamente nell'U.K., vorranno vedere l'Europa essere più esplicita per il suo cover
dell'educazione e dell'agenda sociale. Nel cuore dell'agenda blaire si trova
una forte credenza nella virtù e nel valore della competizione. Nessun aspetto di vita pubblica
dovrà essere risparmato da quello che vedono come i rigori e le disciplini della competizione.
Il mercato potrà determinare tutti, e quindi l'argomento è che tutti saranno beneficiari.
Questo si tratta di un'educazione e di un'incorruzione, le due prezioni del sector pubblico,
che i protagonisti della competizione vogliono riposare dal sector pubblico e aprire
al mercato. Da un punto di vista del corpo dell'America, questo non è difficile da capire.
La competizione, in loro pensi, va da mano in mano con il profitto. E' molto più difficile
da giustificare in termini delle caratteristiche di servizio pubblico valuti, che sono condizionate
a un grado più o meno di grado attraverso l'Europa, e che la competizione, i valori commerciali
e il profitto si affrontano. Controllo democratico, accontabilità pubblica, accessibilità,
servizio alla società e capacità di prendere la vista a lungo termine, solo a pochi.
Nel Reino Unito, il supostamente super efficiente sector privato, colpendo sotto il peso
della competizione globale, è difficile sostenere l'argomento che il privato sia buono o
anche efficiente. Eppure la vita pubblica nel Reino Unito si trova in mano di bossi corporei
del sector privato, che devono portare nuove discipline e un nuovo focus ai servizi pubblici.
Da l'incorruzione della prima Politecnica, come le nuove università, e delle further
education colleges, in gli anni 1990, i corrispondenti di queste instituzioni sono stati
attaccati con i direttori e i maneggi del sector privato, molti di cui non sa nulla o niente
di l'educazione. La storia è simile ai board di ospedali. Un trend parallelo è l'appointamento
dei maneggi e dei cittadini del sector privato, molti di cui hanno fatto una virtù del
lack of experience of the service which they now manage, and they wish to treat courses
and students as outputs or commodities. The pre-1992 universities, called in our system
the old universities, have been spared the worst excesses of this shift. This is part
of a wider trend, often towards spurious competition and actual whole or part privatisation of
our public services. The education unions and the trade union movement in general have
been the most sustained critics of the flawed concept of competition in public services,
as basic as health and education, which many of us regard as a right, access to which should
be determined by need, not individual wealth or the ability to pay. Equally, the unions
assert that all deserve high quality public services, not the spurious choice based on
which is central to the market philosophy. The rhetoric and the actions of the UK government,
which seeks to apply the market model to higher education and to link it to the agenda of
globalisation, ignores the deep rooted culture of internationalism and cooperation in higher
education and research. That historic international collegial culture is present at institutional
level, but perhaps even more powerfully in the organic relationships which develop between
individuals and groups of scholars locally, nationally and globally. These relationships
have evolved as circumstances change, for example to accommodate the demands of mass higher
education and the dramatic transition resulting from the internet and the email revolution.
Teachers and researchers have nothing to fear from this globalisation and an international
frame of reference. This is the environment for their daily work, but the link of globalisation
to the market place is pernicious and dangerous. The UK higher education unions, my own union
NATPI and the association of university teachers have fought against this link, have fought
ministerial complacency about the Bologna process, the threat of gaps and the supposed
safeguards that are in place. And in the process we've built new alliances with NGOs
and a new generation of activist networks. The Bologna debate on convergence of European
higher education systems, which may be a good in itself, needs to take account of these
global challenges. It's also important to explore the implications of Bologna and of
globalisation for the university's historic role as society's key generators of research
and critical enquiry. What are the practical effects of the competition model for the UK
higher education system? Underlying a number of the policy imperatives is the UK government
target for 50% of the generation leaving school to enter higher education, but with no commensurate
increase in resources to achieve this goal. This will clearly have profound implications
for the character of higher education and for the jobs and working conditions of our members.
Some of the government's proposed solutions, most already being applied, are already having
a detrimental effect on the sector and on our members. One of the principal new policies
to achieve the student numbers target in the UK is to shift the concept of higher education
and of the degree itself. Just as countries across Europe are struggling with the three
time-limited cycles defined by the Bologna process, bachelors, masters and doctoral degrees,
which for many countries across Europe mean a shortening of the length of study to a minimum
of three years for bachelors and two years for masters degrees, the UK, which already
had such a system in broad outline, is introducing even shorter two-year foundation degrees.
For many subjects this will be a new label on an existing intermediate level vocational course.
There will be some new courses which will be aimed at increasing access, and the value
of many foundation courses will be judged by how readily they can be extended to a full
degree by further study, although the government envisages that for many students two-year
foundation degrees will be final qualifications. Many commentators fear that the government's
proposed expansion of higher education will be achieved by a significant devaluing of
the product, which is an offer to many young people. At the European level, inter-ministerial
meetings in the Bologna process are watching this development with some scepticism. However,
it's notable that a few other European countries, including the Czech Republic, are following
the UK down the two-year route. Meanwhile at masters level, the UK model for masters
degrees is based mainly on one-year programmes, in contrast to the Bologna prescription of
two years, and this too could be a source of future conflict with our Bologna partners.
The fear of potential devaluing of qualifications is justified by the government's expectation
that an increasing proportion of higher education will be delivered in local intermediate
colleges. As universities become more closely linked with colleges offering intermediate
qualifications, we are likely to see a shift in the boundary between further education
and higher education, and the development of networks of feeder institutions around
major universities on lines closer to the US model. While this has potential advantages
in extending access and in opening up new opportunities for our members who teach
in colleges, there can be little doubt that in the government's view a lowering of the
unit price per student is the key determinant. In the same spirit, the government is seeking
to differentiate universities to create a hierarchy of institutions, elite institutions and
universities, which are actively funded to do a full research programme, a governmental
response to limited funds and burgeoning demand. It will be extremely hard, if not impossible,
for other institutions to break into the Charmed Circle. The crucial link between teaching
and research and scholarship will be broken. Many students will be taught in institutions
where research is at best a marginal activity. It will mean a diminution of the opportunities
many academics have to pursue their research interests, raising fundamental questions about
the nature of the academic's role, and reducing the role of academic staff in a way which
I suspect would be simply unacceptable in many European universities outside the UK.
Already the hierarchy is ossifying into self-selected bands of institutions headed by the Russell
Group of Universities, a would-be Ivy League, in the seat of most research funding. As well
as simply calling for more research funding to match the levels recommended by the OECD,
unions in the UK have called for more fluid responses. These could include encouraging
departments and groups of staff to do research regardless of the institution they're in, fostering
relations between institutions and the imaginative use of consortia. Also, while we attach great
importance to the overriding principle of public sector funding and values, in practice
diversity of funding sources is welcome, subject to appropriate protections.
This brings me to another theme in the UK system which may be familiar to you in Italy.
It's clear that the proportion of funding for higher education and research from the state
is and will continue to shrink, and funding from non-public sources, including corporate
finance, tuition fees and project funding, is expected to grow. One of the key planks
of government policy in the UK, tuition fees paid by students, is one of the most divisive
issues in UK politics today. The union's response, as well as unsuccessfully to oppose
the fees policy, has been to argue for increased public investment in higher education and
research, but also to seek to ensure that the terms on which private funding is deployed
match the same high standards of public funding, particularly in terms of academic freedom,
democratic governance and accountability.
In the UK, institutions are also moving into increased reliance on short-term and part-time
contracts for their staff, and to teaching only appointments. The increasing availability
of postgraduate students without grants or other sources of income has opened up a new
and cheap form of academic labour, as well as an employment group who unions find it
difficult to recruit or to represent. Once again, these trends are clearly cost driven.
They represent a challenge to academic freedom, employment rights and the quality of the education
on offer. Quality is already taking on a new significance in institutions where students
are customers with new rights and expectations, and with the power to challenge what they
perceive as poor quality teaching or support for their learning. One institutional response
which must be a matter of concern is the upward drift in the UK of the level of passes
and of the grade of degree obtained. Quality assurance systems and the capacity of institutions
in different countries to depend on one another's awards will become steadily more important,
as will the maintenance of employer confidence in awards. At institutional level, robust
and transparent systems of quality assurance, built on peer review and rigorous internal processes,
must be developed to provide the essential protections backed by national and international
systems which verify the integrity of those systems. In the UK the quality assurance agency
fulfils this function. This in turn depends on institutions and academics having the time
and other resources to sustain these quality assurance systems. But contrary to what the
advocates of the market will argue, the philosophy built on the customer relations marketplace
mentality cannot sustain quality in higher education. Bologna can and must play an essential
positive role in insisting that quality assurance mechanisms do their job effectively.
The European Network for Quality Assurance, referred to above, is a European network of public
authorities concerned with quality universities and other institutions. Here, as elsewhere
at European level, intergovernmental and interinstitutional structures marginalise the unions.
The organisations representing the academics were most directly responsible for the maintenance,
delivery and verification of quality. Employer pressure towards decentralised bargaining,
moving away from national or regional or institutional level, and even with the possibility
of individual contracts with staff, all pose a new challenge to our national bargaining systems.
These pressures would place extra burdens on institutions and threaten the fragmentation
of the higher education system itself, making it more opaque to potential students, employers
and other customers, and will accelerate hierarchies of esteem among institutions and foster
inequity and a climate of competition, leading to a pursuit of the lowest common denominator
in salaries and conditions, except, as we've seen in recent years, for football-style
transfer packages to attract academic stars. Equally serious for us in the trade unions,
these trends will cause major organisational and representational problems for the academic
unions as they struggle to deal with more bargaining units and the need for cadres of
dedicated officials or active members to cope with the new bargaining levels.
Until very recently the title and concept of a university was jealously guarded in the
UK, where it required a royal charter to grant the university title. Then in the early
90s the polytechnics as a group became universities by an act of parliament and since then a
number of individual institutions have joined their ranks after meeting prescribed basic
criteria. But the global marketplace wishes to reprocess the image of the university
and see it as a brand which can be attached to forms of provision dissociated from a physical
entity or an institution with any of the characteristics which we would recognise as
defining a university. The University of the Future may well be a website, a network of
electronic resources or an in-house company training programme. Private corporations,
particularly in the USA and in East Asia, are increasingly applying the term university
to their own in-house training operations. One of the UK's largest employers, the National
Health Service, is setting up its own NHS university which will be from the outset one of our
biggest universities, operating through regional consortia with a number of conventional universities
as well as building links to intermediate and school level studies. Such developments
will undoubtedly reach new students or customers in innovative and user-friendly ways.
Their impact on the traditional university and the offers they make remains to be seen.
However, these developments present enormous challenges for staff and their unions and
for the general public in understanding and using such new forms of learning and transmission
of knowledge. The new managerial culture in institutions has already had a significant
effect on institutional culture. It continues to act in a corrosive way, for example,
taking income generation and publishing as key criteria for assessing staff performance.
The fact that this trend has been driven from within the institutions themselves makes obsolete
the belief that institutional autonomy in itself is a protection for academic staff.
It must be noted that some of the trends I have mentioned are common to the schools and
further education sectors too and also that the effects of changes in school education
may compound the problems of higher education. Teachers in higher education need to make
common cause with teachers in other sectors and with administrative and support staff
in universities too. Teachers unions through their international links are ideally placed
to argue the interrelatedness of all sectors of education. Higher education historically has had
and must continue to have a key role in the education of teachers both initially and throughout their
careers. These issues should bind the teachers unions together and enable them to present a
united front at the national level and increasingly at the European and global levels too.
One encouraging trend which I believe is being carried through in Italy too has been the close
working and organisational unity which unions in a number of countries are achieving at the national
level, a trend which is beginning to be felt in the UK in spite of a past fraught with
inter-union rivalries. My own union and our sister union the Association of University Teachers
are now exploring the possibility of amalgamating to form a new single union for post-school teachers.
In UK unions as in other sectors of education creaking structures depend on an ageing cohort
of academic staff in full-time tenured posts able to maintain a balance of teaching, research
and scholarship as well as administrative responsibilities who carry the traditional values of the
university system and who are often the ones challenging threats to those values as individuals
or as union activists. The staff coming after them are often appointed on different
terms while many are on casualised contracts and thus far more vulnerable to the whims of the employer.
The UK unions in higher education also rely heavily on the generation now in its last decade of work
many of whom have faced victimisation or negative effect on their academic careers as consequence
of their union activities. Not only are the younger generation of academics often casualised
part-time or on short-time contracts more difficult to engage in the union as ordinary members
when they look at the way future academic careers are likely to unfold they may take the view that
union activism or even union membership is not good for the health of your career.
This is a major challenge for unions in education. The higher education unions and the UK
trade union congress are urgently seeking to address this issue and to promote a new organising culture
to enable the unions to engage the new generation of workers. All these policies and trends put together
amount to a dramatic and potentially undermining challenge to higher education and research.
The issues raised by Bologna and the global marketplace in higher education run through them as a subtext.
The UK government is complacent about our role in the European and global higher education marketplace
but as so often in the past this complacency may be a misjudgment. Trends which are mostly well under way
in UK universities are often seen as exemplars by some other governments in Europe and elsewhere.
This brings me back to a consideration of the European arena at the midway point between the 2003
Berlin interministerial conference and the Bergen conference in May 2005.
Since the Lisbon declaration of 2000 setting the objective of making the European union the most competitive
and dynamic knowledge based economy in the world, Europe's higher education systems have been put centre stage
in the global economic confrontations that are to come and will be challenged to remodel themselves
to fit this increasingly economy driven role. It is clear that for governments both within the European union
and in the much larger framework of the Bologna process, higher education occupies an important part
on the one hand in building social and economic relations within Europe and on the other in establishing Europe's place
in the global market. Both the EU and the Bologna strands of policy are driving us towards a model which should retain
and may even enhance some of the valued collegial qualities of higher education and research within Europe
in European areas for higher education and for research converging to form the Europe of knowledge.
However, this will be paralleled by a drive to make Europe's higher education system a major player in global economic terms.
We do not yet know whether these two goals are compatible and it seems unlikely unless academics and their unions
are brought more completely within the process. The European Commission on Communication, the role of universities in the Europe of knowledge
published in February 2003 helped shape the discourse in the run up to the Berlin inter-ministerial conference.
While it emphasises the importance of Europe's universities, it offers mainly instrumental economically driven arguments
to the system with the commodification of knowledge and the perceived need to compete with the United States as central strands in its thinking.
The paper is particularly concerned with the gap in terms of scale and the level of resources between the US higher education system
and the European and points to the far higher level of private finance for the US system.
However, the EU paper asked many of the right questions about the future shape of our system, recognising and valuing many of its key characteristics.
The European area for higher education and the European research area are now clearly recognised to be mutually dependent
and must converge and be developed as a single Europe of knowledge.
The European Trade Union Committee for Education, responding to the communication on behalf of the higher education and research unions,
asserted that the diversity of Europe's higher education was a strength that must be retained and challenged the Commission's over-reliance on links with business
as a panacea for questions of funding, institutional management and employability of its students.
It should be noted that these moves are mirrored by the Copenhagen Declaration on Enhanced Cooperation in the Field of Vocational Education
made by 31 European Vocational Education Ministers and the European Commission promulgated in November 2002.
Martin will say more about those trends later.
The European level interest in quality, both at EU level and within the Bologna process,
is driven by a recognition that it is an essential factor in the promotion of mobility
and the more or less common pattern of degrees at Bachelors, Masters and Doctorate level will facilitate this in the long term.
However, it's clear that through the European Network for Quality Assurance and the European Credit Transfer System
and the development of diploma supplements on the initiative of the European Commission, Council of Europe and UNESCO,
the certification of qualifications will need to become more elaborated if it is to make possible the acknowledgement of learning
or meaningful comparisons between students' achievements.
The 2003 Berlin Conference was more concerned with consolidation and exhortation than any new steps,
perhaps recognising that as an ever greater number of countries sign up
and as even the original signatories diverge widely in the way in which and the degree to which they are progressing towards the key objectives,
it was not the moment for further new departures.
It seems, however, that governments and university rectors are willfully ignoring the legitimate voice of higher education teachers and researchers,
arguing either that there is no such concerted voice or that the university rectors are capable of speaking for their staffs.
Neither of these positions is tenable.
The unions representing academic staff have met and collectively voiced their concerns for over 15 years at the European level.
First under the auspices of the ETUCE and more recently within the European Structures of Education International.
Virtually since the beginning of the Bologna process, the higher education unions have been seeking to gain access to the debates
and to broaden the scope of the Bologna agenda.
It was shocking to the millennium that education came closer and closer to the European agenda.
Education became more and more important.
We saw prime ministers, we saw different important people from the private sector also speaking about the importance of education.
It was a real change from the 18th to the 19th that now leading people in society and also private sector were speaking about education.
Why did they do that?
Maybe because they realized that education was in jeopardy in many places.
The quality was down and they needed money.
We could have hoped so, but it was not the reason.
The reason of course was money.
But the reason was that in the 19th, during the 19th, most politicians around the world, especially within the OECD countries,
realized that they had to make a change in policy if they would to sustain with the society in growth,
if they would to have still a welfare society, they would have to put more effort into the quality of education.
So education came into the center of the debate in the European Union in the meeting of the heads of states in Lisbon in 2000.
Because the heads of states, prime ministers and others realized that education was necessary,
that we had to create new parameters for competition.
In the older days when the economy was only based on let's say the parameters of competition that would give an example
and that if you were producing shoes in Italy, then it's about producing so many shoes as possible to the lowest price as possible.
That's true. And if you're good at producing wine in another place also in Italy, then it's about producing...
Then inspired, I think, very much from the Bologna Process, a proposal has now come up for a so-called Common Quality Assurance Framework,
which I guess will more or less follow the discussions that we have seen within the Bologna Process.
Because also here we see an interest not only to streamline the structures but also to set certain parameters for the quality.
Then we have a special situation about the non-formal and informal learning.
The European Council of Ministers have decided the resolution in which they have asked the ministers and the commission
to come up with a proposal for how to make a recognition of the non-formal and informal learning
for many of workers who has been through the education already and actually is in service or at work,
but still have some kind of running education but not always education that are recognized as a formal education.
So a very important part here is also how to make it visible that you are in a lifelong education when you are at work.
Lifelong guidance, still in relation to lifelong learning, I think lifelong learning we could talk lifelong time about that
because it's really one of the huge items in the discussion and something that is on the top agenda
but at the same time something that is completely impossible to implement in the same way in the different member states of the European Union.
It's not really realized by a lot of let's say politicians and maybe also even by some of our trade union fellows
but I think we have to be realistic here and say that there are certain common objectives we can follow about lifelong learning
but when it comes into the implementation of it we have to realize systems are really too different to set up a kind of European lifelong learning system
which many of our colleagues want. I'm sorry but I don't believe in this idea. I think it will be completely impossible.
Then also the possibility of development of qualifications and competences at sector level.
You know there is an advisory body connected with the European Union work on vocational education and training, CITIFOP, with the headquarter in Greece
doing a great work in mapping out the different systems that we have and coming up with different projects and surveys telling about the systems and what could be possible and not possible.
I think that the decision about the Leonardo da Vinci committee, which we also are represented in the ETC, to use a huge lot of money also operating at the sectoral level
can really boost the interest of setting up projects within vocational education and training.
I think that what you are more or less experiencing for the moment in the interest of setting up and driving the Copenhagen process is exactly the same thing that boosted the Lisbon process and are boosting for the moment the Bologna process.
It is a change of society. It is a change of the economy. It is a change of the parameters, the competition parameters I was talking about.
But I think that we have one major interest here also being represented in most of these processes, but for the moment as Paul said, for the moment we are not represented in the Bologna process, but I guess we will be.
I have had some very positive meetings with the Norwegian minister preparing the Bergen meeting in May 2005. I had a positive meeting with the European Dutch presidency.
The minister here were also very positive. The European Commission officially support the ETC to be a member on behalf of our higher education colleagues in the Bologna process.
I am quite confident that this time we will come into the system as official partners.
That of course gives us a kind of obligation to work with the system, but also to put up the views of our academic members and to put up our specific goals for the work that we have as we see the Bologna process.
So it can be quite challenging in 2005 if we get on board the Bologna process formally.
But apart from that, we also need to have a discussion about our approach to education as such in the market economy as Paul said.
It's clear that the interest here in these three processes we have been talking about is boosted by the economic changes.
And when I talk to our dear friends in the European Commission, because they are actually very helpful and somewhat positive and even very constructive when we are working together with education,
it seems though clear to me that a lot of officials and also a lot of government officials from the different member countries think of education like education just being a kind of passive tool for the economy and employment policy.
Just like you go to the cafeteria, you go to the employment cafeteria, you realize you have some problems in society with the structure of the labor market.
You have some employment problems also. So you go into the cafeteria and then you look for the tools to solve those problems.
And one of the tools are marked education and you take it down from the shelf and then you take a little education of this and a little education of that and then you have solved the problem.
I mean, well, that was more or less maybe a joke, but we have to be careful that we defend our, let's say, European, because I actually think we have some here, European values of what education is.
Education is maybe also a tool for economy and employment policy, but education is far more than that. Education is the right for the single person to develop their own personality.
It's about also getting the cultural grasp of society and it's about also developing democracy and it's about grasping the history of the nations in Europe.
I think that we will have as teachers and trade unions the obligation to defend that education is far, far more than a passive tool for the implementation of the economy and employment strategy.
And I think that this is something that we should remember every time when we are discussing this.
I know you this morning said focused also on the new treaty. I also know that in the new treaty there are no changes concerning education when we look to the two articles, the two current articles, 149 and 150.
But there are changes for us as normal citizens and also as public workers. And there are positive and there are negative changes.
We had a big struggle, I will tell you, as ETUC, with the Irish presidency because of the changes that were put in about the public sector, because we more or less felt that the changes that they have put in about the public sector in the treaty would open up for a general approach to education being traded with under normal market circumstances.
And that's because in the current Nice treaty we have paragraph 133 where education is exempted from the normal trade articles and trade rules within the European Union.
But they disappeared with the proposal for the new treaty.